56. Or else there is no contradiction (implied in our opinion); as in the case of mantras and the like.
Or else we may put the matter as follows. There is no reason whatever to suspect a contradiction if we declare certain vidy s enjoined in one S kh  to be valid for the udg tha and so on belonging to other S kh s also; for there is no more room for contradiction than in the case of mantras. We observe that mantras, acts, and qualities of acts which are enjoined in one S kh  are taken over by other S kh s also. So e.g. the members of certain Yagur-veda S kh s do not exhibit in their text the mantra, 'Thou art the kutaru 1', which accompanies the taking of the stone (with which the rice-grains are ground); all the same we meet in their text with the following injunction of application, 'Thou art the cock, with this mantra he takes the stone; or else with the mantra, Thou art the kutaru.'
p. 274
Again, the text of some S kh  does not contain a direct injunction of the five offerings called pray gas which are made to the fuel and so on, but it contains the injunction of secondary matters connected with the pray gas, viz. in the passage, 'the seasons indeed are the pray gas; they are to be offered in one and the same spot 1.'--Again, the text of some S kh  does not contain an injunction as to the species of the animal to be sacrificed to Agn shomau--such as would be 'a he-goat is sacrificed to Agn shomau 2;'--but in the same S kh  we meet with a mantra which contains the required specification, 'Hotri', recite the anuv ky , for the fat of the omentum of the he-goat 3.' Similarly mantras enjoined in one Veda only, such as 'O Agni, promote the hautra, promote the sacrifice,' are seen to be taken over into other Vedas also. Another example (of the transference of mantras) is supplied by the hymn, 'He who as soon as born showed himself intelligent,' &c. (Rik. Samh. II, 12), which although read in the text of the Bahvrikas is employed in the Taittir ya Veda also, according to Taitt. Samh. VII, 5, 5, 2, 'The Sagan ya hymn is to be recited.'--Just as, therefore, the members of sacrificial actions on which certain vidy s rest are valid everywhere, so the vidy s themselves also which rest on those members are valid for all S kh s and Vedas.
