9. And on account of the (omk ra) extending over the whole (Veda), (the view that the term udg tha expresses a specialisation) is appropriate.
In the passage, 'Let a man meditate on the syllable Om (as) the udg tha,' the two words 'omk ra' and 'udg tha' are placed in co-ordination. 1 The question then arises
p. 197
whether the relation in which the ideas conveyed by these two words stand to each other is the relation of super-imposition (adhy sa) or sublation (apav da) or unity (ekatva) or specification (viseshana); for prim  facie each of these relations may present itself to the mind.--Adhy sa takes place when the idea of one of two things not being dismissed from the mind, the idea of the second thing is superimposed on that of the first thing; so that together with the superimposed idea the former idea remains attached to the thing on which the second idea is superimposed. When e.g. the idea of (the entity) Brahman superimposes itself upon the idea of the name, the latter idea continues in the mind and is not driven out by the former. A similar instance is furnished by the superimposition of the idea of the god Vishnu on a statue of Vishnu. So, in the case under discussion also, the idea of the udg tha may be superimposed on the omk ra or the idea of the omk ra on the udg tha.--We, in the second place, have apav da when an idea previously attached to some object is recognised as false and driven out by the true idea springing up after the false one. So e.g. when the false idea of the body, the senses, and so on being the Self is driven out by the true idea springing up later--and expressed by judgments such as 'Thou art that'--that the idea of the Self is to be attached to the Self only. Or, to quote another example, when a previous mistaken notion as to the direction of the points of the compass is replaced by the true notion. So here also the idea of the udg tha may drive out the idea of the omk ra or vice vers .--The relation would, in the third place, be that of 'unity' if the terms 'omk ra' and 'udg tha' were co-extensive in meaning; just as the terms, 'the Best of the Twice-born,' 'the Br hmana,' 'the god among men,' all denote an individual of the noblest caste.--The relation will, finally, be that of specification if, there being a possibility of our understanding the omk ra in so far as co-extensive with all the Vedas, the term 'udg tha' calls up the idea of the sphere of action of the udg tri. The passage would then mean, 'Let a man meditate on that omk ra which is the udg tha,' and would
p. 198
be analogous to an injunction such as 'Let him bring that lotus-flower which is blue.'
All these alterations present themselves to the mind, and as there is no reason for deciding in favour of any one, the question must remain an unsettled one.
To this p rvapaksha-view the S tra replies, 'And on account of extending over the whole, it is appropriate.'
The word 'and' stands here in place of 'but,' and is meant to discard the three other alternatives. Three out of the four alternatives are to be set aside as objectionable; the fourth, against which nothing can be urged, is to be adopted.--The objections lying against the first three alternatives are as follows. In the case of adhy sa we should have to admit that the word which expresses the idea superimposed is not to be taken in its direct sense, but in an implied sense 1; and we should moreover have to imagine some fruit for a meditation of that kind. 2 Nor can it be said that we need not imagine such a fruit, as scripture itself mentions it in the passage, 'He becomes indeed a fulfiller of desires' (I, 1, 7); for this passage indicates the fruit, not of the ideal superimposition of the udg tha on the omk ra, but of the meditation in which the omk ra is viewed as the fulfilment of desires.--Against the hypothesis of an apav da there likewise lies the objection that no fruit is to be seen. The cessation of wrong knowledge can certainly not be alleged as such; for we see no reason why the cessation of the idea that the omk ra is udg tha and not omk ra or vice vers  should be beneficial to man. Sublation of the one idea by the other is moreover not even possible in our case; for to the omk ra the idea of the omk ra remains always attached, and so to the udg tha the idea of the udg tha. The passage, moreover, does not aim at teaching the true
p. 199
nature of something, but at enjoining a meditation of a certain kind.--The hypothesis of unity again is precluded by the consideration that as in that case one term would suffice to convey the intended meaning, the employment of two terms would be purposeless. And moreover the term 'udg tha' is never used to denote the omk ra in its connexion with the Rig-veda and Yagur-veda; nor is the word 'omk ra' used to denote that entire second subdivision of a s man which is denoted by the word 'udg tha.' Hence it cannot be said that we have to do with different words only denoting one and the same thing.--There thus remains the fourth alternative, 'On account of its comprising all the Vedas.' That means: In order that the omk ra may not be understood here as that one which comprises all the Vedas, it is specified by means of the word 'udg tha,' in order that that omk ra which constitutes a part of the udg tha may be apprehended.--But does not this interpretation also involve the admission of implication, as according to it the word 'udg tha' denotes not the whole udg tha but only a part of it, viz. the omk ra?--True, but we have to distinguish those cases in which the implied meaning is not far remote from the direct meaning and those in which it is remote. If, in the present case, we embrace the alternative of adhy sa, we have to assume an altogether remote implication, the idea of one matter being superimposed on the idea of an altogether different matter. If, on the other hand, we adopt the alternative of specification, the implication connected therewith is an easy one, the word which in its direct sense denotes the whole being understood to denote the part. And that words denoting the whole do duty for words denoting the part is a matter of common occurrence; the words 'cloth,' 'village,' and many others are used in this fashion 1.--For all these reasons we declare that the appropriate view of the Kh ndogya-passage is to take the word 'udg tha' as specialising the term 'omk ra 2.'
