55. But the (meditations) connected with members (of sacrificial acts are) not (restricted) to (particular) S kh s, according to the Veda (to which they belong).
The above occasional discussion being terminated, we return to the discussion of the matter in hand.--We meet in the different S kh s of each Veda with injunctions of vidy s connected with certain members of sacrificial acts, such as the udg tha and the like. Cp. e.g. 'Let a man meditate on the syllable Om (as) the udg tha' (Kh. Up. I, 1, 1); 'Let a man meditate on the fivefold S man as the five worlds' (Kh. Up. II, 2, I); 'People say: "Hymns, hymns!" the hymn is truly this earth' (Ait.  r. II, 1, 2, 1); 'The piled up fire-altar truly is this world' (Sat. Br . X, 5, 4, 1). A doubt here arises whether the vidy s are enjoined with reference to the udg tha and so on as belonging to a certain S kh  only or as belonging to all S kh s. The doubt is raised on the supposition that the udg tha and so on differ in the different S kh s because the accents, &c. differ.
Here the p rvapakshin maintains that the vidy s are enjoined only with reference to the udg tha and so on which belong to the particular S kh  (to which the vidy  belongs).--Why?--On account of proximity. For as such general injunctions as 'Let a man meditate on the udg tha' are in need of a specification, and as this need is satisfied by the specifications given in the same S kh  which stand in immediate proximity, there is no reason for passing over that S kh  and having recourse to specifications enjoined
p. 273
in other S kh s. Hence the vidy s are to be held apart, according to the S kh s to which they belong.
To this the S tra replies 'but those connected with members,' &c.--The word 'but' discards the prim  facie view. The meditations are not restricted to their own S kh s according to the Veda to which they belong, but are valid for all S kh s.--Why?--Because the direct statements of the texts about the udg tha and so on enounce no specification. For to such general injunctions as 'Let a man meditate on the udg tha'--which say nothing about specifications--violence would be done, if on the ground of proximity we restricted them to something special belonging to its own S kh , and that would be objectionable because direct statement has greater weight than proximity. There is, on the other hand, no reason why the vidy  should not be of general reference. We therefore conclude that, although the S kh s differ as to accents and the like, the vidy s mentioned refer to the udg tha and so on belonging to all S kh s, because the text speaks only of the udg tha and so on in general.
Next: III, 3, 56
