35. On account of the inferential sign further on, together with Kaitraratha.
The kshattriya-hood of G nasruti is further to be accepted on account of the Kshattriya Abhiprat rin Kaitraratha, who is mentioned further on in this very same Samvargavidy  which Raikva imparts to G nasruti.--But why?--As follows. The section beginning 'Once a Brahmak rin
p. 342
begged of Saunaka K peya and Abhiprat rin K kshaseni while being waited on at their meal,' and ending 'thus do we, O Brahmak rin, meditate on that being,' shows K peya, Abhiprat rin, and the Brahmak rin to be connected with the Samvarga-vidy . Now Abhiprat rin is a Kshattriya, the other two are Br hmanas. This shows that there are connected with the vidy , Br hmanas, and from among non-Br hmanas, a Kshattriya only, but not a S dra. It therefore appears appropriate to infer that the person, other than the Br hmana Raikva, who is likewise connected with this vidy , viz. G nasruti, is likewise a Kshattriya, not a S dra.--But how do we know that Abhiprat rin is a Kaitraratha and a Kshattriya? Neither of these circumstances is stated in the legend in the Samvarga-vidy ! To this question the S tra replies, 'on account of the inferential mark.' From the inferential mark that Saunaka K peya and Abhiprat rin K kshaseni are said to have been sitting together at a meal we understand that there is some connexion between Abhiprat rin and the K peyas. Now another scriptural passage runs as follows: 'The K peyas made Kaitraratha perform that sacrifice' (T nd Br . XX, 12, 5), and this shows that one connected with the K peyas was a Kaitraratha; and a further text shows that a Kaitraratha is a Kshattriya. 'from him there was descended a Kaitraratha who was a prince.' All this favours the inference that Abhiprat rin was a Kaitraratha and a Kshattriya.
So far the S tras have shown that there is no inferential mark to prove what is contradicted by reasoning, viz. the qualification of the S dras. The next S tra declares that the non-qualification of the S dra proved by reasoning is confirmed by Scripture and Smriti.
Next: 36. On account of the reference to ceremonial purifications...
