31. On the ground of imaginative identification (the highest Lord may be called pr desam tra), Gaimini thinks; for thus (Scripture) declares.
Or else the passage about him who is measured by a span may be considered to rest on imaginative combination.--Why?--Because the passage of the V gasaneyi-br hmana
p. 152
which treats of the same topic identifies heaven, earth, and so on--which are the members of Vaisv nara viewed as the Self of the threefold world--with certain parts of the human frame, viz. the parts comprised between the upper part of the head and the chin, and thus declares the imaginative identity of Vaisv nara with something whose measure is a span. There we read, 'The Gods indeed reached him, knowing him as measured by a span as it were. Now I will declare them (his members) to you so as to identify him (the Vaisv nara) with that whose measure is a span; thus he said. Pointing to the upper part of the head he said: This is what stands above (i.e. the heavenly world) as Vaisv nara (i.e. the head of Vaisv nara 1). Pointing to the eyes he said: This is he with good light (i.e. the sun) as Vaisv nara (i.e. the eye of V.). Pointing to the nose he said: This is he who moves on manifold paths (i.e. the air) as Vaisv nara (i.e. the breath of V.). Pointing to the space (ether) within his mouth he said: This is the full one (i.e. the ether) as Vaisv nara. Pointing to the saliva within his mouth he said: This is wealth as Vaisv nara (i.e. the water in the bladder of V.). Pointing to the chin he said: This is the base as Vaisv nara (i.e. the feet of V.).'--Although in the V gasaneyi-br hmana the heaven is denoted as that which has the attribute of standing above and the sun as that which has the attribute of good light, while in the Kh ndogya the heaven is spoken of as having good light and the sun as being multiform; still this difference does not interfere (with the unity of the vidy ) 2, because both texts equally use the term 'measured by a span,' and because all s kh s intimate the same.--The above explanation of the term 'measured by a span,' which rests on imaginative identification, the teacher Gaimini considers the most appropriate one.
