V. Know Thy Self 1
The world then was not yet unfolded. It became unfolded in Name and Shape, so that one might say, "He of this or that name is of this or that shape." So even now it becomes unfolded in Name and Shape, so that one may say, "He of this or that name is of this or that shape." He 2 passed into it up to the nail-tips, as a razor might
p. 65
be laid in a razor-case or the All-Supporter 1 in the All-Supporter's nest. They see Him not; for He is divided. As breathing, He is called Breath; as speaking, Speech; as seeing, Sight; as hearing, Hearing; as thinking, Mind; these are the names for his workings. A man who worships one or another thereof understands not; for He is but in division as one or another thereof. So He should be worshipped as the Self; for therein do all these become one.
This Self is the track of the universe, for by it is the universe known, yea, as a thing may be followed up by its track. Fame and praise a man finds who has such knowledge.
This Self is dearer than a son, dearer than substance, dearer than all beside, more inward. If of a man who calls another than the Self dear it should be said that he will lose his darling, it may well come to pass. He should worship the Self only as darling; for him who worships the Self as darling his darling perishes not.
They say: "Seeing that men deem that by knowledge of Brahma they shall become the universe, what did Brahma know that He became the universe?"
The world forsooth was in the beginning Brahma. It knew itself, "I am Brahma"; therefore it became the universe. And whosoever of the gods understood this also became the same;
p. 66
likewise of sages and of men. Seeing this, the sage V madeva set it forth, saying: "I have become Manu and the Sun." 1 So now likewise he who knows "I am Brahma" becomes the universe. The very gods have no power that he should not be so; for he becomes the Self of them.
Now he who worships another godhead, saying "This is not the same as I," understands not; he is as it were a beast belonging to the gods. Even as many beasts profit a man, so each man profits the gods. It is unpleasing when one beast is taken away; how much more when many are taken! Therefore it is not pleasing to them 2 that men should know this.
