XI. The Wisdom of Raikva 1
J na ruti Pautr ya a was a devout giver, bestowing much largesse, preparing much food. He caused lodgings to be built everywhere, that he might have men everywhere fed. Now in the night there flew swans by. One swan said to another, "Ho, ho, Dim-eye, Dim-eye! J na ruti
p. 81
[paragraph continues] Pautr ya a's splendour is outspread like that of the heavens; so touch it not, lest thou burn thyself."
The other answered him, "Who forsooth is he of whom thou speakest as though he were Raikva of the Cart?"
"What meanest thou by Raikva of the Cart?"
"As the lower dice-throws fall under the winning four-throw, so whatsoever good deed the people do falls to him; of him who knows this and of that which he knows do I speak." 1
J na ruti Pautr ya a overheard this. When he rose up, he said to his chamberlain, "Ho, thou speakest as of Raikva of the Cart 2; what meanest thou by Raikva of the Cart?"
"As the lower dice-throws fall under the winning four-throw, so whatsoever good deed the people do falls to him; of him who knows this and of that which he knows do I speak."
The chamberlain sought [Raikva], and came back, saying "I have found him not." [J na ruti] said to him, "Ho, go for him in the place where a Brahman is to be sought."
p. 82
[Raikva] was under a waggon, scratching his scabs; and he 1 sat down before him, and said to him, "Art thou Raikva of the Cart, my lord?"
"Yea, I am," he answered.
The chamberlain came back, saying, "I have found him."
Then J na ruti Pautr ya a took six hundred kine, a golden chain, and a mule-car, and drew near to him, and said, "Raikva, here are six hundred kine, a golden chain, and a mule-car; my lord, teach me the deity that thou worshippest."
But the other answered, "Fie on thee, base fellow; keep them for thyself, with thy kine!"
Then J na ruti Pautr ya a took a thousand kine, a golden chain, a mule-car, and his daughter, and drew near to him, and said, "Raikva, here are a thousand kine, a golden chain, a mule-car, a wife, and the village in which thou art sitting; my lord, teach me!"
He lifted up her face, and said, "He has brought these! Base fellow, with this face alone thou mightest have made me speak."
That is the place called Raikva-par a in the land of the Mah v ishas where he dwelt at his bidding.
Thus he said to him:
"The Wind in sooth is an ingatherer. When fire goes out, it sinks into the Wind. When the sun goes down, it sinks into the Wind. When
p. 83
the moon goes down, it sinks into the Wind. When waters dry up, they sink into the Wind. For the Wind gathers in all these. Thus as to godhead.
Now as to personality. The Breath is an in-gatherer. 1 When one sleeps, the speech sinks into the Breath, the eye into the Breath, the ear into the Breath, the mind into the Breath. For the Breath gathers in all these. These are the two ingatherers, the Wind among the gods and the Breath among the breaths.
A Brahman-student begged alms of  aunaka K peya and Abhiprat ri K kshaseni when their meal was set before them. They gave him nothing. He said:
"Who is the one God, guardian of the world, Who swallowed up the other mighty four? On him, K peya, mortals may not look; Abhiprat ri, many are his homes.
To him forsooth who has this food it is not given."
Then  aunaka K peya, having pondered, answered him thus:
"The spirit of the Gods, the creatures  sire, Golden of tooth and greedy he, nor witless. Exceeding is his majesty, they say, For he uneaten eats what none may eat.
"So this is what we worship, O Brahman student.
p. 84
[paragraph continues] Give him alms!" And they gave to him.
These in sooth are the ten, five and five 1; this is the four-throw. Therefore the ten, the four-throw, are in all parts of the world as food. This is Vir , eater of food; thereby all the world is seen. All the world is seen by him, he becomes an eater of food, who has this knowledge."
