XII. Satyak ma 2
Satyak ma J b la thus addressed his mother Jab l : "I would keep the term of Brahman-studentship, madame; of what family am I?"
She said to him: "I know not, child, of what family thou art. I got thee in my youth, when I was much busied in doing service. I myself know not of what family thou art. But I am named Jab l , thou art named Satyak ma; call thyself then Satyak ma J b la." 3
p. 85
He went to H ridrumata Gautama and said: "I would keep the term of Brahman-studentship with thee, sir; let me come to thee, sir."
He said to him: "Of what family art thou, beloved?"
"I know not, sir," said he, "of what family I am. I asked my mother, and she answered me saying, "I got thee in my youth, when I was much busied in doing service; I myself know not of what family thou art; but I am named Jab l , thou art named Satyak ma." So I am myself Satyak ma J b la, sir."
He said to him: "None but a Brahman can speak out thus. Bring the faggots, 1 beloved. I will receive thee; thou hast not departed from truth."
When he had received him, he set aside four hundred lean and feeble cows, and said: "Herd thou these, beloved." As he drove them forth, [Satyak ma] said: "I will not return but with a thousand." He stayed away some years; then when they had grown to a thousand, a bull said to him, "Satyak ma!" "Sir!" he answered.
"We have come to a thousand, beloved; take us to the master's homestead. I will tell thee a quarter of Brahma."
p. 86
"Tell me, sir."
And he said to him: "The eastern region is a sixteenth, the western region a sixteenth, the southern region a sixteenth, the northern region a sixteenth. This, beloved, is a quarter of Brahma, in four sixteenths, and called The Brilliant. He who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Brilliant, becomes brilliant in this world; brilliant worlds he wins who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Brilliant. The Fire will tell thee a quarter."
In the morning he drove out the cows. When they came home at evening, he laid a fire, closed in the cows, laid on fuel, and sat down facing the east westward of the fire.
The Fire said to him, "Satyak ma!" "Sir!" he answered.
"I will tell thee a quarter of Brahma, beloved."
"Tell me, sir."
And he said to him: "The earth is a sixteenth, the sky a sixteenth, the heaven a sixteenth, the ocean a sixteenth. This, beloved, is a quarter of Brahma, in four sixteenths, and called The Boundless. He who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Boundless, becomes boundless in this world; boundless worlds he wins who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma
p. 87
in four sixteenths as The Boundless. The Swan will tell thee a quarter."
In the morning he drove out the cows. When they came home at evening, he laid a fire, closed in the cows, laid on fuel, and sat down facing the east westward of the fire. A swan flew towards him and said, "Satyak ma!" "Sir!" he answered.
"I will tell thee a quarter of Brahma, beloved."
"Tell me, sir."
And he said to him: "Fire is a sixteenth, the sun a sixteenth, the moon a sixteenth, the lightning a sixteenth. This, beloved, is a quarter of Brahma, in four sixteenths, and called The Lustrous. He who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Lustrous, becomes lustrous in this world; lustrous worlds he wins who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Lustrous. The madgu-bird will tell thee a quarter."
In the morning he drove out the cows. When they came home at evening, he laid a fire, closed in the cows, laid on fuel, and sat down facing the east westward of the fire. A madgu-bird flew towards him and said, "Satyak ma!" "Sir!" he answered.
"I will tell thee a quarter of Brahma, beloved."
"Tell me, sir."
And he said to him: "The breath is a sixteenth,
p. 88
the eye a sixteenth, the ear a sixteenth, the mind a sixteenth. This, beloved, is a quarter of Brahma, in four sixteenths, and called The Spacious. He who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Spacious, becomes spacious in this world; spacious worlds he wins who with such knowledge worships this quarter of Brahma in four sixteenths as The Spacious."
He came to the master's homestead. The master said to him, "Satyak ma!" "Sir!" he answered.
"Thou art bright, beloved, as one who knows Brahma. Who has taught thee?"
"Other than men," he answered; "but prithee do thou tell it to me, sir. For I have heard from men like thee, sir, that knowledge learned from a master is the best guide."
He told him thereof; and naught of it was lost.
