18. Organism of Soul. I. Upanishads. Every organic being is a soul, according to the Upanishads; and the degree of its organic development is directly proportioned to the merits of its former works. The highest therefore are the souls of gods and men. The soul in its human embodiment exercises three classes of functions: (1) the sense-organs (indriya), which in slumber or swoon become paralysed and merge themselves into (2) the organ of thought (manas), which converts the data of the sense-organs into conscious modes of thought and volition; and (3) the "breaths" (pr a), a term originally denoting all the functions of physical life, then those higher functions upon which generally depends all life, whether conscious or unconscious, and into which during sleep or swoon are merged the manas and the sense-organs already absorbed in the latter.
The name indriya for the sense-organs appears first in Ka h. and Kau. Other texts usually call them pr a (a collective term, from the supremacy of the pr a, or breath), and comprise under the
p. 43
name ordinarily breath, speech, sight, hearing, and manas (e.g. B.A. I. iv. 7). The same ten indriyas as in the later system occur first in B.A. II. iv. 11, IV. v. 12, which adds manas and heart (cf. Pra. IV. 2). On manas as central function of cognition and action see B.A. I. v. 3, IV. i. 6, Ch. VII. iii f., Ka h. VI. 7. The sense-organs are compared to horses drawing the car of the body, manas to their bridle, Ka h. III. 3; in Maitr. II. 6 the organs of action are the horses, the organs of intelligence (see below) the reins, manas the driver. On the immersion of organs with manas in pr a see especially B.A. IV. iii. 12, Ch. VI. viii. 2, Pra. IV. 2 f. The "breaths" are usually given as five, viz.: (1) pr a in the strict sense, which in B.A. and Ch. denotes exspiration, and later exspiration and inspiration together; (2) ap na, in B.A. and Ch. the inspiration, later the wind causing digestion in the bowels or evacuation; (3) vy na, respiratory action connecting pr a and ap na, variously conceived; (4) sam na, sometimes the wind digesting food, sometimes connection between exspiration and inspiration; (5) ud na, which carries food and drink up and down (Maitr. II. 6) and guides the soul to Brahma in death and sleep (Pra. III. 7, IV. 4).
II. Later Ved nta. In the system of  ankara the gross body, subtle body (  19), karm raya (  20), and pr as are classed together as the "determinations" or up dhis by which the Self
p. 44
conceives itself as an individual soul (above,   12). Whereas the gross body is abandoned on death, the other organisms travel in a potential form with the soul throughout all its births. By the term pr a  ankara, following the old Upanishadic usage, designates not only the unconscious "breaths," but also the conscious indriyas. The indriyas (the functional forces whence arise the material sense-organs) according to him comprise the five functions of action (viz. speech, grasp, locomotion, generation, and excretion) and the five of buddhi or intelligence (viz. sight, hearing, taste, touch, and smell), with which is associated the manas as their centre. The pr as, or "breaths" in the strict sense are the five known in the Upanishads.  ankara explains pr a as exspiration, ap na as inspiration, vy na as the force maintaining life when both exspiration and inspiration are checked, sam na as the digestive force, and ud na as the current leading the soul from the body on death (on II. iv. 8 f.). When death takes place, the indriyas sink into manas, this into the pr as, these into the individual soul (lodged in the heart), this into the "subtle body" (  19), which then starts on its wanderings. Thus  ankara (on IV. ii. 1 f.) explains the statement of Ch. VI. viii. 6 that on death Speech is merged in manas, this into pr a, this into Heat, this into the Higher Godhead. These words, he holds, mean that the potential functions of conscious sensation are
p. 45
merged into those of unconscious vitality, the latter into the individual soul, this again into the "Heat," i.e. the "subtle body," which conveys the soul through its wanderings. See also   12, 15.
The later Ved nta (e.g. the Ved nta-s ra and the  tma-viveka and V kya-sudh  ascribed to  ankara) schematises the functions of empiric thought by dividing the anta -kara a, its collective organisation, into chitta, manas (often loosely called anta -kara a), buddhi, and aha -k ra. To chitta it ascribes the function of passing notice, to manas that of deliberation, and to buddhi that of determination. Sometimes also it uses buddhi as a general term denoting both aha -k ra, the conception of egoity, which is the agent in empiric mental action, and manas, the instrument of egoity; in the false identification of these functions with the Self or Spirit lies the root of phenomenal illusion.
Next: The Subtle Body
