43. On account of the plurality of indicatory marks; for that (proof) is stronger. This also is declared (in the P rva M m ms ).
The Taittir yaka contains another daharavidy , 'The thousand-headed god, the all-eyed one,' &c. (Mah n r. Up. XI). Here the doubt arises whether this vidy , as being one with the previously introduced vidy , states qualities to be included in the meditation enjoined in that vidy , or qualities to be included in the meditations on the highest Self as enjoined in all the Ved nta-texts.--The former is the case, the P rvapakshin holds, on account of the leading subject-matter. For in the preceding section (X) the meditation on the small ether is introduced as the subject-matter. 'There is the small lotus placed in the middle of the town (of the body), free from all evil, the abode
p. 667
of the Highest; within that there is a small space, free from sorrow--what is within that should be meditated upon' (Mah n r. Up. X, 23). Now, as the lotus of the heart is mentioned only in section X, the 'N r yana-section' ('the heart resembling the bud of a lotus, with its point turned downwards,' XI, 6), we conclude that that section also is concerned with the object of meditation to which the daharavidy  refers.--Against this view the S tra declares itself, 'on account of the majority of indicatory marks'; i.e. there are in the text several marks proving that that section is meant to declare characteristics of that which constitutes the object of meditation in all meditations on the highest being. For that being which in those meditations is denoted as the Imperishable, Siva, Sambhu. the highest Brahman, the highest light, the highest entity, the highest Self, and so on, is here referred to by the same names, and then declared to be N r yana. There are thus several indications to prove that N r yana is none other than that which is the object of meditation in all meditations on the Highest, viz. Brahman, which has bliss and the rest for its qualities. By 'linga' (inferential mark) we here understand clauses (v kya) which contain a specific indication; for such clauses have, according to the P rva M m ms , greater proving power than leading subject-matter (prakarana). The argumentation that the clause ' the heart resembling the bud of a lotus flower,' &c., proves that section to stand in a dependent relation to the daharavidy , is without force; for it being proved by a stronger argument that the section refers to that which is the object of meditation in all meditations, the clause mentioned may also be taken as declaring that in the daharavidy  also the object of meditation is N r yana. Nor must it be thought that the accusatives with which the section begins (sahasrasirsham, &c.) are to be connected with the 'meditating' enjoined in the previous section; for the 'meditating' is there enjoined by a gerundive form ('tasmin yad antas tad up sitavyam'), and with this the subsequent accusatives cannot be construed. Moreover, the subsequent clause ('all this is N r yana,'
p. 668
[paragraph continues] &c., where the nominative case is used) shows that those accusatives are to be taken in the sense of nominatives.--Here terminates the adhikarana of 'the plurality of indicatory marks.'
Next: 44. There is option with regard to what precedes...
