53. But those (meditations) which are connected with members (of sacrifices) are not (restricted) to (particular) s kh s, but rather (belong) to all s kh s.
p. 676
There are certain meditations connected with certain constituent elements of sacrifices-as e.g. 'Let a man meditate on the syllable Om (as) the Udg tha '(Kh. Up. I, 1, 1); 'Let a man meditate on the fivefold Saman as the five worlds' (Kh. Up. II, 2, 1), &c. The question here arises whether those meditations are restricted to the members of those s kh s in whose texts they are mentioned; or to be connected with the Udg tha, and so on, in all s kh s. There is here a legitimate ground for doubt, in so far as, although the general agreement of all Ved nta-texts is established, the Udg tha, and so on, are different in each Veda since the accents differ in the different Vedas--The P rvapakshin declares that those meditations are limited each to its particular s kh ; for, he says, the injunction 'Let him meditate on the Udg tha' does indeed, verbally, refer to the Udg tha in general; but as what stands nearest to this injunction is the special Udg tha of the s kh , in whose text this injunction occurs, and which shares the peculiarities of accent characteristic of that s kh , we decide that the meditation is enjoined on members of that s kh  only.--The S tra sets this opinion aside. The injunction of meditations of this type is valid for all s kh s, since the text expressly connects them with the Udg tha in general. They therefore hold good wherever there is an Udg tha. The individual Udg thas of the several s kh s are indeed distinguished by different accentuation; but the general statement, 'Let him meditate on the Udg tha.' suggests to the mind not any particular Udg tha, but the Udg tha in general, and hence there is no reason to restrict the meditation to a particular s kh . From the principle moreover that all s kh s teach the same doctrine, it follows that the sacrifice enjoined in the different s kh s is one only; and hence there is no reason to hold that the Udg tha suggested by the injunction of the meditation is a particular one. For the Udg tha is only an element in the sacrifice, and the sacrifice is one and the same. The meditations are not therefore limited to particular s kh s.
Next: 54. Or there is no contradiction as in the case of mantras and the rest
