p. 629
THIRD P DA.
1. What is understood from all the Ved nta-texts (is one), on account of the non-difference of injunction and the rest.
The S tras have stated whatever has to be stated to the end of rousing the desire of meditation-concluding with the fact that Brahman bestows rewards. Next the question is introduced whether the vidy s (i.e. the different forms of meditation on Brahman which the Ved nta-texts enjoin) are different or non-different, on the decision of which question it will depend whether the qualities attributed to Brahman in those vidy s are to be comprised in one act of meditation or not.--The first subordinate question arising here is whether one and the same meditation--as e.g. the vidy  of Vaisv nara--which is met with in the text of several s kh s, constitutes one vidy  or several.--The vidy s are separate, the P rvapakshin maintains; for the fact that the same matter is, without difference, imparted for a second time, and moreover stands under a different heading--both which circumstances necessarily attend the text's being met with in different s kh s--proves the difference of the two meditations. It is for this reason only that a restrictive injunction, such as the one conveyed in the text, 'Let a man tell this science of Brahman to those only who have performed the rite of carrying fire on their head' (Mu. Up. III, 2, 10)--which restricts the impaiting of knowledge to the  tharvanikas, to whom that rite is peculiar--has any sense; for if the vidy s were one, then the rite mentioned, which is a part of the vidy , would be valid for the members of other s kh s also, and then the restriction enjoined by the text would have no meaning.--This view is set aside by the S tra, 'What is understood from all the Ved nta-texts' is one and the same meditation, 'because there is non-difference of injunction and the rest.' By injunction is meant the
p. 630
injunction of special activities denoted by different verbal roots--such as up s ta 'he should meditate,' vidy t 'he should know.' The and the rest' of the S tra is meant to comprise as additional reasons the circumstances mentioned in the P rva M m ms -s tras (II, 4, 9). Owing to all these circumstances, non-difference of injunction and the rest, the same vidy  is recognised in other s kh s also. In the Kh andogya (V, 12, 2) as well as in the V gasaneyaka we meet with one and the same injunction (viz. 'He should meditate on Vaisv nara'). The form (character, r pa) of the meditations also is the same, for the form of a cognition solely depends on its object; and the object is in both cases the same, viz. Vaisv nara. The name of the two vidy s also is the same, viz. the knowledge of Vaisv nara. And both vidy s are declared to have the same result, viz. attaining to Brahman. All these reasons establish the identity of vidy s even in different s kh s.--The next S tra refers to the reasons set forth for his view by the P rvapakshin and refutes them.
Next: 2. If it be said that the vidy s are not one on account of difference...
