17. They (the pr nas) are senses, on account of being so designated, with the exception of the best (the mukhya pr na).
We have treated of the mukhya pr na and the other
p. 94
eleven pr nas in due order.--Now there arises another doubt, viz. whether the other pr nas are functions of the mukhya pr na or different beings.--The p rvapakshin that they are mere functions, on account of scriptural statement. For scripture, after having spoken of the chief pr na and the other pr nas in proximity, declares that those other pr nas have their Self in the chief pr na, 'Well, let us all assume his form. Thereupon they all assumed his form' (Bri. Up. I, 5, 2l).--Their unity is moreover ascertained from the unity of the term applied to them, viz. pr na. Otherwise there either would result the objectionable circumstance of one word having different senses, or else the word would in some places have to be taken in its primary sense, in others in a derived sense. Hence, as pr na, ap na, &c. are the five functions of the one chief pr na, so the eleven pr nas also which begin with speech are mere functions of the chief pr na.--To this we reply as follows. Speech and so on are beings different from the chief pr na, on account of the difference of designation.--Which is that difference of designation?--The eleven pr nas remaining if we abstract from the best one, i.e. the chief pr na, are called the sense-organs (indriya), as we see them designated in Sruti, 'from him is born breath, mind, and all organs of sense' (Mu. Up. II, 1, 3). In this and other passages pr na and the sense-organs are mentioned separately.--But in that case the mind also would have to be excluded from the class of sense-organs, like the pr na; as we see that like the latter it is separately mentioned in the passage, 'The mind and all organs of sense.' True; but in Smriti eleven sense-organs are mentioned, and on that account the mind must, like the ear, and so on, be comprised in the sense-organs. That the pr na on the other hand is a sense-organ is known neither from Smriti nor Sruti.--Now this difference of designation is appropriate only if there is difference of being. If there were unity of being it would be contradictory that the pr na although one should sometimes be designated as sense--organ and sometimes not. Consequently the other pr nas are different in being from the chief pr na.--For this conclusion the following S tra states an additional reason.
p. 95
Next: II, 4, 18
