9. But she begins with light; for thus some read in their text.
The 'but' has assertory force. 'Light' in the S tra means Brahman, in accordance with the meaning of the term as known from texts such as 'On him the gods meditate, the light of lights' (Bri. Up. X, 4, 16); 'That light which shines beyond heaven' (Kh. Up. III, 13, 7). 'She begins with light' thus means 'she has Brahman for her cause.'--'For thus some read in their text,' i.e. because the members of one S kh , viz the Taittiriyas read in their
p. 367
text that this 'ag ' has Brahman for her cause. The Mah n r yana-Upanishad (of the Taittir yas) at first refers to Brahman abiding in the hollow of the heart as the object of meditation. 'Smaller than the small, greater than the great, the Self placed in the hollow of this creature'; next declares that all the worlds and Brahma and the other gods originated from that Self; and then says that there sprung from it also this ag  which is the cause of all 'The one ag  (goat), red, white and black, which gives birth to numerous offspring of the same shape, one aga (he-goat) loves and lies by her; another one forsakes her after having enjoyed her.' The subject-matter of the entire section evidently is to give instruction as to the whole aggregate of things other than Brahman originating from Brahman and thus having its Self in it; hence we conclude that also the ag  which gives birth to manifold creatures like her, and is enjoyed by the soul controlled by karman, while she is abandoned by the soul possessing true knowledge is, no less than vital airs, seas, mountains, &c., a creature of Brahman, and hence has its Self in Brahman. We then apply to the interpretation of the Svet svatara-text the meaning of the analogous Mah n rayana-text, as determined by the complementary passages, and thus arrive at the conclusion that the ag  in the former text also is a being having its Self in Brahman. That this is so, moreover, appears from the Svet svatara itself. For in the early part of that Upanishad, we have after the introductory question, 'Is Brahman the cause?' the passage 'The sages devoted to meditation and concentration have seen the person whose Self is the divinity, hidden in its own qualities' (I, 1, 3); which evidently refers to the ag . as being of the nature of a power of the highest Brahman. And as further on also (viz. in the passages 'From that the M yin creates all this, and in this the other is bound up through M ya'; 'Know then Prakriti to be M y  and the Great Lord the ruler of M y '; and 'he who rules every place of birth,' V, 9-11) the very same being is referred to, there remains not even a shadow of proof for the assertion that the mantra under discussion
p. 368
refers to an independent Prakriti as assumed by the S nkhyas.
But a further objection is raised, if the Prakriti denoted by ag  begins with, i.e. is caused by Brahman, how can it be called ag , i.e. the non-produced one; or, if it is non-produced, how can it be originated by Brahman? To this the next S tra replies.
Next: 10. And on account of the teaching of formation ... there is no contradiction; as in the case of the honey
