6. Even if we admit (the S nkhya position refuted in what precedes, it is invalidated by other objections) on account of the absence of a purpose (on the part of the pradh na).
Even if we, accommodating ourselves to your (the S nkhya's) belief, should admit what has been disproved in the preceding S tra, viz. that the pradh na is spontaneously active, still your opinion would lie open to an objection 'on account of the absence of a purpose.' For if the spontaneous activity of the pradh na has, as you say, no reference to anything else, it will have no reference not only to any aiding principle, but also to any purpose or motive, and consequently your doctrine that the pradh na is active in order to effect the purpose of man will become untenable. If you reply that the pradh na does not indeed regard any aiding principle, but does regard a purpose, we remark that in that case we must distinguish between the different possible purposes, viz. either enjoyment (on the part of the soul), or final release, or both. If enjoyment, what enjoyment, we ask, can belong to the soul which is naturally incapable of any accretion (of pleasure or pain) 1? Moreover, there would in that case be no opportunity for release 2.--If release, then the activity of the pradh na would be purposeless, as even antecedently to it the soul is in the
p. 373
state of release; moreover, there would then be no occasion for the perception of sounds, &c. 1--If both, then, on account of the infinite number of the objects of pradh na to be enjoyed (by the soul) 2, there would be no opportunity for final release. Nor can the satisfaction of a desire be considered as the purpose of the activity of the pradh na; for neither the non-intelligent pradh na nor the essentially pure soul can feel any desire.--If, finally, you should assume the pradh na to be active, because otherwise the power of sight (belonging to the soul on account of its intelligent nature) and the creative power (belonging to the pradh na) would be purposeless; it would follow that, as the creative power of the pradh na does not cease at any time any more than the soul's power of sight docs, the apparent world would never come to an end, so that no final release of the soul could take place 3.--It is, therefore, impossible to maintain that the pradh na enters on its activity for the purposes of the soul.
