2. If it be said--like milk or water; there also (intelligence guides).
What has been said--the S nkhya rejoins--as to the impossibility of the Pradh na not guided by an intelligent principle constructing this variously constituted world, is unfounded; for the Pradh na may be supposed to act in the same way as milk and water do. Milk, when turning into sour milk, is capable of going by itself through a series of changes: it does not therefore depend on anything else. In the same way we observe that the homogeneous water discharged from the clouds spontaneously proceeds to transform itself into the various saps and juices of different plants, such as palm trees, mango trees, wood-apple trees, lime trees, tamarind trees, and so on. In the same way the Pradh na, of whose essential nature it is to change, may, without being guided by another agent, abide in the interval
p. 486
between two creations in a state of homogeneousness, and then when the time for creation comes modify itself into many various effects due to the loss of equilibrium on the part of the gunas. As has been said '(the Pradh na acts), owing to modification, as water according to the difference of the abodes of the several gunas' (S nkhya K . I, 16). In this way the Unevolved acts independently of anything else.
To this reasoning the S tra replies 'there also.' Also, in the instances of milk and water, activity is not possible in the absence of an intelligent principle, for these very cases have already been referred to as proving our position. The S tra II, 1, 24 (where the change of milk into sour milk is instanced) meant to prove only that a being destitute of other visible instruments of action is able to produce its own special effect, but not to disprove the view of all agency presupposing an intelligent principle. That even in water and so on an intelligent principle is present is proved by scriptural texts, 'he who dwells in water' and so on.
Next: 3. And because from the independence of the Pradh na there would follow the non-existence of what is different from creation
